A MATHEMATICAL AND ENGINEERING REPORT
Three ways to search
binary embeddings
From stored data to query latency,
memory usage, and recall
A Cluster, then score every selected document.
B Cluster, then traverse an inverted bitplane index.
C Cluster, then enumerate keys from the query’s ideal sign pattern.
This report develops the three methods from the same score and the same retrieval task. It
explains what is built before a query, what is touched during a query, and where each method
can lose recall. Every general cost formula uses named parameters. Small numerical examples
make the formulas concrete; measured results are identified separately.
Reading order. Start with the four-bit example and shared pipeline. Each method then has
its own data layout, pseudocode, operation count, latency model, and memory calculation. The
statistical section explains what can and cannot be inferred about recall. The final section collects
the formulas for comparison under a RAM limit.
10 September 2026
Three ways to search binary embeddings 1
Contents
1 Start with the question a search must answer 2
2 What is built once, and what every query pays 6
3 Approach A: cluster, then full scan 10
4 Approach B: cluster, then inverted bitplanes and branching 14
5 Approach C: cluster, then walk backwards from the ideal key 18
6 Deriving recall without assuming the answer 25
7 What the existing measurements support 31
8 Bring the formulas together 34
A A finite-sample view of prefix recall 39
B Checklist for an honest numerical implementation 39
C Floating-point arithmetic and exactness 40
D Optional expansion of the embedding cost 40
E Reproduction and parameter ledger 41
Three ways to search binary embeddings 2
1 Start with the question a search must answer
Suppose a database contains N documents. A query arrives, and the system must return K
documents. We want the smallest query latency that fits the available RAM and reaches a
specified recall target. Before comparing algorithms, we must agree on what “the correct K
documents” means.
This report first uses one precise target: the top K documents under the same float-query,
binary-document inner product. This isolates the search index. A later reranking step may
use longer float embeddings, but that is a different score and a different reference ranking. Exact
binary search need not recover the exact float ranking, and neither ranking is automatically the
same as human relevance.
1.1 Three costs that must not be confused
1. Index storage: data built in advance and kept between queries. Examples are packed
document codes, cluster offsets, centroids, bitplanes, and key directories.
2. Query RAM: temporary live data needed by one query. Examples are a query vector, score
tables, a top-R result heap, pending branch masks, and key-enumeration states.
3. Query work: operations and data accesses over time. Reading the same array a thousand
times does not require a thousand stored copies, but it can cost a thousand reads.
The number of scored documents alone does not measure work. A method can score fewer
documents and still read more memory or manage a much larger queue.
1.2 The shared pipeline
All three primary methods begin with clusters. The no-clustering experiment is the special case
C = P = 1, not a different definition of the task.
Three ways to search binary embeddings 3
Query text
Embed and prepare
prefixes
Route to selected
clusters
Apply the same
eligibility filter
C: enumerate lookup
A: scan selected rows B: traverse bitplanes
keys
Keep binary candidates
Optional longer-vector
rerank
Return top K documents
Figure 1: The common query pipeline. Only the candidate-search stage changes between A, B and C.
An embedding model converts query text to a float vector. A short representation routes the
query to selected clusters. Optional filters select eligible documents. The index produces up to R
binary-score candidates, with R ≥ K. An optional final stage fetches longer vectors and reranks
those candidates, then returns K results.
If the experiment only measures the index, cache the query embedding and omit the optional
reranker. If the experiment claims end-to-end query latency, include them. We will keep both
versions visible in the formulas.
1.3 A four-bit example we can calculate by hand
Let
q = (0.7,−0.4,0.2,−0.1), t = sign(q) = (+1,−1,+1,−1).
Three ways to search binary embeddings 4
Write a stored +1 as bit 1 and −1 as bit 0. The ideal bit pattern is therefore 1010. Define
a = |q | and A = P a = 1.4. A document bit that agrees with the query contributes +a ; a
i i i i i
disagreement contributes −a .
i
d d
S(q,b) = X q b = A−2X a 1[b ̸= t ]. (1)
i i i i i
i=1 i=1
| {z }
πq(b)
The quantity π (b) is the weighted mismatch penalty. Maximizing score is exactly the same
q
as minimizing this penalty. The factor two is not a hardware setting: replacing a contribution
+a by −a changes the score by 2a .
i i i
Document Code Mismatching coordinates Score
1 1010 none 1.4
2 1011 4 1.2
3 1000 3 1.0
4 0010 1 0.0
5 1110 2 0.6
6 0101 1,2,3,4 −1.4
7 1001 3,4 0.8
8 0011 1,4 −0.2
For example, document 7 pays 0.2+0.1 = 0.3, so its score is 1.4−2(0.3) = 0.8. The exact global
top two are documents 1 and 2. We break equal scores by document ID throughout.
The query gives both a preferred sign and a cost for getting that sign wrong. It does not tell us
which preferred patterns exist in the database. That distinction drives both branching and key
enumeration.
1.4 Matryoshka prefixes are useful; they are not sorted magnitudes
A Matryoshka model trains selected prefixes of an embedding to remain useful representations
[2]. It does not impose |q | ≥ |q | ≥ ··· ≥ |q | for every query. A later coordinate may have
1 2 D
a larger magnitude than an earlier one. Nor does the name of the training method tell us the
numerical recall of the first h binary signs.
There are three distinct choices:
• Take the first h coordinates: a fixed prefix that can be indexed in advance.
• Sort all coordinates by |q |: a query-dependent traversal order, useful for bitplanes.
i
• Use a longer representation for final scoring: this can change the ranking after retrieval.
A hash table built for one fixed prefix does not become a table for the query’s largest-magnitude
coordinates just because the query is sorted. The lookup coordinates would have changed.
Three ways to search binary embeddings 5
1.5 Parameters and units
The formulas below are not tied to a particular code length, cluster count, word width, or SIMD
implementation. Table 1 is the common notation. Additional symbols are introduced where their
algorithm first needs them.
Table 1: Shared parameters. Counts and byte sizes are different types of quantity.
Symbol Meaning Units
N Number of stored documents documents
D Full embedding dimension coordinates
d Dimension of the binary score in Equation (1) bits / doc
d ,d Routing and optional final-reranking dimensions coordinates
r f
C Number of disjoint clusters clusters
n Physical number of document rows in cluster j; P n =N documents
j j j
P(q),P Probed cluster set and its size set, count
e Eligible rows in probed cluster j, after filters; e ≤n documents
j j j
N ,N P n and P e documents
sel elig j∈P j j∈P j
K,R Final result count and binary candidate-heap capacity, K ≤R documents
w,b Bits and bytes per bitmap word; b =w/8 bits, bytes
w w
g,G Bits per score-table group and G=⌈d/g⌉ groups bits, groups
b ,b Bytes per stored table score and query float bytes
s q
b ,b Bytes per document ID and offset bytes
id o
b ,b Bytes per routing-centroid and final-vector coordinate bytes
c f
M Available physical RAM budget bytes
RAM
J Number of simultaneously active queries queries
c Effective time for a named unit of work x seconds/unit
x
T ,Q Query-embedding latency and its peak scratch RAM seconds,
emb emb
bytes
Assume positive integer dimensions and counts, 1 ≤ P ≤ C, 1 ≤ K ≤ R, and a word width w
divisible by eight. A selected pool may contain fewer than R eligible rows, in which case fewer
candidates are returned.
Define two widths we will use repeatedly:
s = b ⌈d/w⌉, W = ⌈n /w⌉, s = b W . (2)
code w j j mask,j w j
The first describes one packed document; the second describes one bitplane across a cluster. They
have different axes. If a filter leaves only a few eligible rows, W does not shrink unless the data
j
is physically rebuilt or represented differently.
1.6 Three kinds of statement in this report
An algebraic identity, such as Equation (1), is exact under its stated score. An operation count
is exact for the stated pseudocode or layout, but can change with the implementation. A latency
or statistical estimate also needs hardware or distribution assumptions. Measured tables report
a particular experiment. Keeping these categories separate is necessary for a fair comparison.
Three ways to search binary embeddings 6
2 What is built once, and what every query pays
2.1 The public Exa-style starting point
Exa’s public description combines Matryoshka prefixes, binary document codes, float-query
scoring through small lookup tables, similarity-based clustering, filtering, and final reranking [1].
Its published example uses particular dimensions and cluster counts; our formulas replace those
choices with parameters. The pseudocode here is an explicit reference design, not a claim to
reproduce Exa’s private implementation or production latency.
2.2 Preprocessing and the common index
A document is encoded before queries arrive. Its code and document ID are placed in its cluster’s
contiguous row range. The baseline ownership convention is simple: each document has one
packed code and one ID. Cluster offsets identify the ranges. Bitplanes or hash-key postings are
additional structures described later.
Listing 1: Common preprocessing; executed before serving queries.
BuildCommonIndex(documents, model, d, routing_configuration):
vectors = encode documents with model
routing = train or choose the cluster assignment rule
for each document x:
b = signs of the first d coordinates of vectors[x]
j = assign x to one cluster
append (document_id[x], packed(b)) to cluster j
concatenate cluster rows and record C + 1 offsets
save centroids if centroid routing is used
save filter metadata and optional final vectors
return common index
Offline encoding, clustering and sorting are build costs. They are not charged as query latency.
Their outputs are charged as index storage. Build-time temporary arrays can be large; the
serving-RAM formulas below deliberately do not describe the construction peak.
For centroid routing, define
M = Ns +Nb +(C +1)b +Cd b +M +M . (3)
base code id o r c filter extra
M includesexplicitlychosencommonmetadataandoptionalstoredfinalvectors. Forexample,
extra
fully resident reranking vectors contribute Nd b . If they are on disk, they still consume storage,
f f
but only the resident portion belongs in serving RAM. For sign-prefix routing, omit the centroid
term. Do not silently count a second ID array in one method and omit the only ID array in
another.
Example: Stored bytes versus touched bytes
Suppose an illustrative database has N = 109 documents and d = 256 bits. Packed code
payload without extra padding is 109·256/8 = 32 GB. With eight-byte IDs, the codes and
IDs together need 40 GB before centroids or metadata. Here GB means 109 bytes. These
are example choices for N,d,b , not constants in Equation (3).
id
Three ways to search binary embeddings 7
2.3 Step 1: encode and prepare the query
Listing 2: Query preparation shared by all methods.
PrepareQuery(text, model, D, d, d_r):
full_query = model.encode(text, D)
q = prepare prefix full_query[0:d] for the chosen score
routing_query = prepare prefix full_query[0:d_r]
t[i] = +1 if q[i] >= 0 else -1
a[i] = abs(q[i])
return full_query, q, routing_query, t, a
The model’s tokenization, neural-network computation and output processing cost T (ℓ ,D)
emb q
for query length ℓ . This is a measured function, not a universal linear formula in D. Truncation,
q
optional normalization, signs and magnitudes add T = O(D+d+d ) elementary work. Their
prep r
coefficient can be measured separately. A norm or layer-normalization rule must be the same
rule used when preparing the documents.
Query-vector storage is O(D+d+d ) floats, with possible views instead of copies. Record the
r
chosen ownership. We denote the actual retained query buffers by Q and the embedding
vec
model’s own scratch peak by Q .
emb
2.4 Step 2: select clusters
With a flat centroid router, score all C centroids, then retain the best P. This is distinct from
scoring binary documents: centroids are normally floats.
Listing 3: A simple flat centroid router with bounded selection memory.
Route(q_route, centroids, P):
nearest = heap with capacity P
for j in all C clusters:
route_score = dot(q_route, centroid[j])
offer (route_score, j) to nearest
return the P selected cluster IDs
Let c price one centroid coordinate’s multiply-add contribution, and let H be the number of
fma r
heap comparisons or equivalent selection operations. Then
T = Cd c +H c , H = O(Clog(P +1)). (4)
route r fma r sel r
A streaming heap needs O(P) records; materializing all centroid scores needs O(C) scores instead.
Either is valid, but their RAM formulas differ. Hierarchical or approximate routing has its own
measured visited-centroid count; replace C by that count only when the algorithm actually avoids
the other centroids. Its routing recall also needs evaluation.
A sign-prefix router uses r fixed sign coordinates and at most 2r addresses. It is not the same as
similarity-based centroid clustering. Assigning a document is cheap, but ranking many possible
query buckets is not free. One reference router scores all C bucket keys using ⌈r/g⌉ lookup terms
each and selects P, giving
T = T +C⌈r/g⌉c +H c .
route,sign table,r lut r sel
Three ways to search binary embeddings 8
A direct or multi-probe address generator can replace that router, but must count its own
key-generation and queue work. When every cluster is probed, routing can simply return all
cluster IDs and skip distance-based selection.
2.5 Cluster count does not determine the selected document count
Exactly,
N (q) = X n . (5)
sel j
j∈P(q)
Only under balanced clusters is this approximately NP/C. An optional load factor λ(q) =
N /(NP/C) summarizes deviation for a given query; it is not automatically constant as P
sel
changes. For bitplanes, the individual n matter because wider clusters make each node more
j
expensive. A mean load factor does not identify the largest cluster or peak frontier memory.
2.6 Step 3: apply optional filters
A filter can return eligible row IDs or a bitmap. Denote its time by T and its scratch by
filter
Q . For a bitmap intersection over the probed clusters, a reference work count is P W
filter j∈P j
word visits per input mask. For sorted ID lists, cost depends on list lengths and the intersection
method instead.
After filtering, e rows are eligible in cluster j, so a scan scores N = P e documents. A dense
j elig j j
bitplane still has physical width W . A filter that removes most rows therefore helps scoring
j
immediately, but does not automatically make each bitplane intersection short.
The reference set for recall must obey the same filter. Otherwise a correct filtered search is
unfairly penalized for not returning ineligible documents.
2.7 Step 4: build the float-query score tables
Split the d document signs into groups of g. A group has at most 2g sign patterns. For each
query group, precompute its dot product with every possible pattern.
Listing 4: The score table. Padding contributes zero in the last group.
BuildScoreTable(q, g):
for group in ceil(len(q) / g) groups:
for pattern in all g-bit patterns:
table[group, pattern] = 0
for coordinate in this group:
add q[coordinate] * sign(pattern, coordinate)
return table
ScoreDocument(packed_code, table):
score = 0
for group in all groups:
pattern = extract this group’s bits from packed_code
score += table[group, pattern]
return score
Three ways to search binary embeddings 9
For this straightforward build,
G = ⌈d/g⌉, U ≤ G2gg, (6)
build
T = U c , Q = G2gb , (7)
table build build table s
T (F) = FGc . (8)
score lut
c includes extracting the pattern, the lookup and accumulation in the chosen kernel. Faster
lut
table construction is possible, but it must replace U explicitly. Larger g reduces the number
build
of lookup terms and increases the table exponentially. Register capacity and cache behavior
therefore matter.
Example: Two query values and a four-entry table
For the first two values (0.7,−0.4), the contributions for patterns 00, 01, 10, 11 are
respectively −0.3,−1.1,1.1,0.3. With g = 2, document 1011 uses the first-group entry 1.1
and the second-group entry 0.1, giving 1.2.
Plain XOR followed by a population count computes unweighted Hamming distance. It matches
Equation(1)onlywhenallquerymagnitudesareequaluptoacommonscale. Replacingweighted
scoring by that operation changes the task.
2.8 Step 5: retain candidates and optionally rerank
Atop-Rheapstorestheworstretainedcandidateatitsroot. Everyscoreddocumentneedsatleast
a comparison with that root once the heap is full. Let H (F,R) be the actual selection-operation
s
count. A simple worst-case bound is O(F log(R+1)), not zero.
T = H (F,R)c , Q ≈ R(b +b )+Q . (9)
select s heap results id s heap,overhead
For an optional rerank of R′ returned candidates, K ≤ R′ ≤ R, let
T (R′) = T (R′,d )+R′d c +H (R′,K)c +T (K). (10)
finish fetch f f fine f fine,sel output
T depends on whether vectors are already resident, on SSD, or remote. If u vectors are
fetch f
fetched in a batch, the temporary float-vector buffer is u d b , not necessarily R′d b . The
f f f f f
candidate IDs must remain live until fetching and scoring finish.
2.9 Shared latency and peak RAM
For sequential stages, define
T = T +T +T +T +T . (11)
common emb prep route filter table
The method-specific candidate work and Equation (10) are added later. For an index-only
measurement, explicitly set the embedding and final-stage terms to zero.
Peak scratch RAM is a maximum of simultaneously live buffers, not a sum of every temporary
array ever allocated. If embedding, search and reranking do not overlap,
Q = max{Q ,Q ,Q }. (12)
peak emb,stage search,stage finish,stage
Three ways to search binary embeddings 10
Each stage term includes buffers retained from previous stages. We use Q for common buffers
base
live during candidate search, including query vectors, score tables, filter masks, routing output,
and the candidate heap.
For J concurrent queries sharing one resident index,
M = M +M +M +max X Q (t)
serving resident model runtime u
t
u∈A(t) (13)
≤ M +M +M +JQ .
resident model runtime peak,max
M counts shared resident embedding-model weights when inference is local. An external
model
embedding service contributes latency but no local model-weight allocation. M is a chosen
runtime
reserve or measured runtime overhead. It is not another stored copy of the index. Separate
process replicas or device copies must be counted if the actual system has them.
For separate CPU and GPU memories, apply the residency and peak formulas to each memory
pool. Count additional device copies if they exist. A throughput speedup does not by itself
establish a feasible memory layout.
3 Approach A: cluster, then full scan
This is the reference candidate-search method. Once clusters and eligible rows are chosen, it
scores every eligible row. There is no approximation inside that selected pool. The work is
regular and can read packed codes sequentially when filtering does not scatter them.
Three ways to search binary embeddings 11
Stored cluster offsets,
codes and IDs
Prepared query and Open selected cluster
score table ranges
Score each eligible
document
Update the top-R heap Yes
More eligible rows?
No
Order candidates and
rerank if requested
Figure 2: Approach A. The selected pool is smaller than the corpus only because of routing or filters.
3.1 Data layout and preprocessing
The common index from Equation (3) is sufficient. Cluster j occupies the row range between
offsets j and j +1. A row contains its packed code, and the corresponding ID array maps the
row back to the original document.
Listing 5: Candidate search for Approach A.
ScanSelectedClusters(q, selected_clusters, eligible, table, R):
best = empty top-R heap
for cluster j in selected_clusters:
for row in eligible rows of j:
Three ways to search binary embeddings 12
score = ScoreDocument(code[row], table)
best.offer(score, document_id[row])
return best in descending score, breaking ties by ID
The loop is over N rows, not necessarily NP/C. If all clusters are searched and no filter
elig
removes documents, N = N. Empty filtered clusters require no document scoring, although
elig
finding that they are empty can still have a cost.
3.2 Step-by-step cost
Step Work Live temporary data
Locate cluster ranges P offset/range accesses selected cluster IDs
Visit eligible rows N row iterations current row/iterator
elig
Score rows N G lookup terms shared score table,
elig
accumulator
Keep best R H (N ,R) selection operations top-R heap
s elig
Return candidates sort at most R results if needed result array or heap
storage
Writing c for range setup and T (R) for final candidate ordering,
range rank
T = Pc +N Gc +H (N ,R)c +T (R). (14)
A,candidates range elig lut s elig heap rank
The general end-to-end latency is
T = T +T +T (R′). (15)
A common A,candidates finish
For the stated heap implementation, the candidate-stage time complexity is
O(P +N ⌈d/g⌉+N log(R+1)+Rlog(R+1)).
elig elig
The lookup term count is not a claim that each term is exactly one CPU instruction.
3.3 What is read, and what must remain in RAM?
The packed-code payload read for scoring is
V = N s . (16)
A,codes elig code
ID reads, filter data, table accesses and result-heap accesses are additional traffic. A cache may
satisfy many of them. Thus this is a named payload count, not a complete DRAM measurement.
Sequential and scattered rows may have different effective c or c .
lut row
Index storage and candidate-stage scratch are
M = M , (17)
A,index base
Q = Q +Q +Q . (18)
A,search base row iterator scan workspace
A streaming scan does not need an N-element score array. A matrix-based batch implementation
may choose to allocate such an array; then that allocation must be added. The same algorithmic
ranking can therefore have different peak RAM under different implementations.
Three ways to search binary embeddings 13
3.4 A routing miss in the four-bit example
Partition the eight documents from Section 1 into
C = {1,3,4,6}, C = {2,5,7,8}.
0 1
This is an illustrative fixed partition, not a claim about the output of a particular clustering
run. Suppose the router opens only C . A scans scores 1.2,0.6,0.8,−0.2 and returns documents
1
2 and 7. The global top two are 1 and 2, so recall is 1/2. The scan did nothing wrong inside the
opened cluster: document 1 was never considered.
Opening both clusters returns documents 1 and 2. This is why a scan can be exact in its selected
pool and still have imperfect global recall.
3.5 SIMD changes a coefficient, not the score
SIMD means one instruction operates on several data lanes. It can accelerate code extraction,
lookup accumulation, and selection. It does not by itself change the number of stored bits. There
are two useful ways to model its effect.
Calibrated model. Measure the implemented kernel’s effective time per work unit, c , for the
lut
relevant dimensions and access pattern. If that rate already includes selection, use a combined
T and do not add the heap cost a second time.
score+select
Resource model. If a kernel performs U compute units and causes V bytes of DRAM
op DRAM
traffic, compute throughput Γ and memory bandwidth β give the lower bound
T ≥ max{U /Γ, V /β}. (19)
kernel op DRAM
An effective SIMD factor s can change Γ to s Γ . It cannot make the bandwidth term
simd simd 0
disappear. Random access, synchronization and fixed overhead can put actual time above the
bound. Do not add this resource estimate on top of a fitted coefficient that already includes the
same work.
For multiple queries, a float score matrix can be written as QB⊤, where rows of B are expanded
binary codes. That exposes matrix operations, but expansion, batching delay, device transfers
and score-buffer storage have costs. A fast GPU batch is not automatically a fast single-query
request.
What Approach A guarantees
For a fixed eligible pool, A returns its exact binary top R under the stated tie rule. With
every eligible cluster searched, it has 100% binary recall. With partial routing, its global
binary recall is limited by which true neighbors reach the selected pool. No property of
the scan restores documents missed by routing, quantization or an earlier filter.
Three ways to search binary embeddings 14
4 Approach B: cluster, then inverted bitplanes and branching
Approach B keeps the same document score and common routing stage. Its extra index stores
the document bits by coordinate instead of only by row. That makes one sign test applicable to
many document positions at once.
Eligible root masks from
selected clusters
Take the best pending
node
Split needed
Intersect with next
Bound cannot improve Small active set
bitplane
Yes
Scan leaf mask and Queue both nonempty
Discard node
score rows children
Continue within budget?
No
Return current
candidates
Figure 3: Approach B. A pending node has a set of active documents and an optimistic score bound.
4.1 What a bitplane stores
For the opened example cluster C = (2,5,7,8), the document codes are 1011, 1110, 1001, 0011.
1
The transposed index is
Three ways to search binary embeddings 15
doc 2 doc 5 doc 7 doc 8
bitplane 1 1 1 1 0
bitplane 2 0 1 0 0
bitplane 3 1 1 0 1
bitplane 4 1 0 1 1
Each row is a bitmap over document positions, not a list of full document vectors. An active
bitmap says which document positions still belong to the current node. To require coordinate i
to be 1, intersect the active bitmap with plane i. To require 0, intersect with its complement,
while masking unused padding positions.
Listing 6: Build the additional bitplane index.
BuildBitplanes(cluster_codes, d, w):
for each cluster j:
W[j] = ceil(number_of_rows(j) / w)
planes[j] = d arrays of W[j] zero words
for local row u in j:
for coordinate i in 0 .. d-1:
if code[j, u, i] is 1:
set bit (u mod w) in planes[j, i, floor(u/w)]
return planes
The extra persistent storage is exactly, for this layout,
C
M = db X W , M = M +M . (20)
planes w j B,index base planes
j=1
Without per-cluster padding this is Nd/8, a second binary-code-sized payload. For example, ten
billion 256-bit codes occupy 320 GB; their bitplanes add approximately another 320 GB, not 32
TB. Padding and other index structures are additional.
4.2 Why the query suggests a traversal direction
At coordinate i, choosing the query’s sign adds no penalty; choosing the opposite sign adds
a = |q |. Sorting coordinates by descending a tests the largest potential penalties first. For the
i i i
four-bit query, the order is 1,2,3,4 with weights 0.7,0.4,0.2,0.1.
In C , matching bit 1 keeps documents 2,5,7; the alternative contains document 8 with accumu-
1
lated penalty 0.7. Matching bit 2 next keeps 2,7; document 5 moves to another pending node
with penalty 0.4. This is a useful order, but neither alternative is automatically safe to discard.
Example: A greedy path can miss the best document
Take q = (0.6,0.5,0.4,0.3) and two documents: 0111 and 1000. The first has penalty 0.6
and score 0.6. The second has penalty 1.2 and score −0.6. A greedy choice of the matching
first bit selects 1000 and misses the better document. The largest individual weight is
smaller than the sum of several remaining weights.
Three ways to search binary embeddings 16
4.3 A bound makes branching safe
Let a node have accumulated penalty p on coordinates already tested. Untested coordinates
cannot contribute a negative mismatch penalty. Consequently,
U(node) = A−2p (21)
is an upper bound on every active document’s final score. If the result heap is full and U is
strictly below its worst retained score, that node cannot improve the result. For equal scores,
keep searching unless the ID tie rule is also certified.
The frontier is the collection of pending nodes. A best-first search takes the node with the
largest upper bound, or equivalently the smallest penalty. The bound is optimistic: it may
describe a sign combination that no actual document can achieve. A weak bound can keep many
nodes alive even though none ultimately improves the answer.
Listing 7: Dense bitplane search across the selected clusters.
SearchBitplanes(q, selected_clusters, eligible, table, R, L, B_node):
order = coordinates sorted by decreasing abs(q[i])
frontier = empty min-penalty priority queue
best = empty top-R heap
for each selected cluster j:
active = bitmap of eligible rows, with physical width W[j]
if active is not empty:
frontier.push(j, depth=0, penalty=0, active)
visits = 0
while frontier is not empty:
if best is full and best_possible(frontier) < best.worst_score:
break
if a finite B_node is set and visits == B_node:
break
node = frontier.pop_smallest_penalty()
visits += 1
if node.count <= L or node.depth == d:
for word in node.active: # includes zero words
for each set bit in word:
score its document and offer it to best
continue
i = order[node.depth]
matching = active AND preferred_sign_plane(j, i, q)
opposite = active AND NOT preferred_sign_plane(j, i, q)
queue nonempty matching child with the same penalty
queue nonempty opposite child with penalty + abs(q[i])
return best
L is the leaf-size threshold and B the total node budget across all probes. An unlimited
node
budget permits exact termination by bounds; a finite budget can stop before the remaining nodes
are safely ruled out. A random exploration probability changes which pending node is visited
next. It is not a direct formula for recall or a synonym for the number of nodes.
Three ways to search binary embeddings 17
4.4 Count split visits, leaf visits, and scored documents separately
For each selected cluster, let
s = visited split nodes, ℓ = visited leaf nodes, f = documents fully scored.
j j j
Define V = P (s +ℓ ) and F = P f . For a disjoint traversal without rescoring, F ≤ N . A
j j j j j elig
finite node budget gives V ≤ B , but does not determine F. The two principal bitmap counts
node
are
U = X s W , U = X ℓ W . (22)
split j j leaf j j
j j
A split word in the reference implementation reads an active word and a plane word, produces
two child words, and counts matches. It includes two ANDs, a population count, complements
and an accumulation. Allocating zero-filled child arrays can add two initialization writes. A leaf
still scans all words in its active bitmap before enumerating set bits.
With separate effective coefficients,
T = T +T +U c +U c +Vc
B,candidates order roots split split leaf leafword node
+FGc +H (F,R)c +T (R), (23)
lut,leaf s heap rank
T = T +T +T (R′). (24)
B common B,candidates finish
Here T = O(dlogd) and T = O(P W ) for dense root construction. c may be
order roots j j node
replaced by explicit queue-comparison, mask-allocation and copy terms. Use one convention
consistently; do not charge an allocation twice.
4.5 The full-width cost is the important hidden term
Example: Few scores do not imply little work
In the saved one-million-document run, w = 64 gives W = 15,625. A node budget of
32,768 produced a mean 22,557.88 split visits and 10,210.12 leaf visits. Therefore
U = 352,466,875, U = 159,533,125.
split leaf
Their sum is 512 million word-loop visits. About 163,766 documents were fully scored.
With g = 4, that is 10.48 million score-table terms, versus 64 million terms for the scan.
The reduction in scoring was real, but it came with hundreds of millions of bitmap visits.
Word visits and score-table terms are not equal-cost instructions.
If a tree were fully explored, perfectly balanced, and every internal node had two nonempty
children, then with L documents per leaf there would be roughly n /L leaves and one fewer split.
j
This gives a dense bitmap term of order
 
n2
O X j . (25)
Lw
j
This is an explanatory idealization, not a predictor for real embeddings. Fixed-bit splits can
have only one nonempty child. A finite traversal also leaves unvisited nodes. Thus the actual
split count need not be half the visited-node count.
Three ways to search binary embeddings 18
A single greedy path visits only about log (n /L) levels in a balanced example, but still pays
2 j
a full W at each level and has no general recall guarantee. In the broad worst case, a fixed-
j
coordinate trie can contain O(n d) nonempty prefix nodes, making dense traversal work as large
j
as O(dP n2/w) before scoring and queue costs. Growing N alone does not guarantee that
j j
branching will overtake a scan.
4.6 Peak query RAM: the pending masks matter
Let F(t) be the frontier at time t, and let j(v) identify a node’s cluster. If a node record needs
b bytes and bitmap capacity is fully allocated,
node
Q (t) = X (b +b W ). (26)
B,frontier node w j(v)
v∈F(t)
Capacity growth and allocator overhead can be represented by a factor γ ≥ 1 or, preferably,
B
by measured capacities. During a split, the parent and newly allocated children can coexist. A
conservative candidate-stage expression is
Q = Q +Q +max[γ Q (t)+Q (t)+Q (t)]. (27)
B,search base order B B,frontier current children
t
For nonempty, disjoint pending sets, frontier count is at most N . Starting with at most P
elig
roots, each processed binary split can increase that count by at most one, so a finite budget also
gives |F| ≤ P +B . Multiplying that bound by the largest possible mask is conservative and
node
can be very loose. It should not be reported as measured RAM.
When Approach B can help
B can help when it avoids enough full scoring to repay the bitmap, queue and allocation
work. Useful conditions include strong early query penalties, small physical bitmaps, tight
score bounds and a modest live frontier. Unlimited search is exact inside the selected pool
under valid bounds and ties. Budget-limited search needs measured recall; its budget is
not itself an accuracy percentage.
5 Approach C: cluster, then walk backwards from the ideal key
Approach C changes the lookup structure. Instead of repeatedly intersecting document masks, it
asks: which stored documents have this particular key? Start from the signs the query prefers,
then consider other keys in increasing mismatch penalty.
The primary method here still starts with the same selected clusters. A global hash table is the
special case C = P = 1. We do not silently switch between clustered and global formulas.
Three ways to search binary embeddings 19
Selected clusters and
key streams
Take the next weighted
key
Look up its posting
range
Occupied key No
Filter rows and update
Empty key
candidates
Stopping rule satisfied?
Yes
Return candidates
Figure 4: Approach C. Each cluster has a key directory and postings. Empty lookups still consume
work.
5.1 Full keys and short keys are different choices
Let I be the fixed set of h lookup coordinates, often the first h positions. A full key has h = d.
h
Its weighted penalty determines the complete binary score. A short key has h < d. It ranks a
prefix, then the full d-bit score ranks the retrieved candidates.
A full-key search can be exact if it enumerates keys in true query-weighted order and finishes the
result-boundary tie. A short-key candidate quota does not have that guarantee. It can still work
well, and can also be made exact with a valid full-score stopping bound. These are properties of
the stopping rule, not of the name “walk backwards.”
Three ways to search binary embeddings 20
5.2 The data structure behind a key lookup
For each cluster, a directory maps a key to a posting range containing the local row references of
documents with that key. There may be many documents per key. Finding a directory entry
without finding its document rows is not enough to produce results.
Listing 8: Build a clustered key index.
BuildKeyIndex(cluster_codes, lookup_coordinates):
for each cluster j:
groups = group local row references by their lookup key
concatenate the groups into a posting array
for each occupied key:
directory[j][key] = (posting_start, posting_count)
return directories, postings
A dense directory has an offset for every possible key. A sparse hash table only stores
occupied keys but adds key, slot and load-factor overhead. A sorted-key array is another option:
it can use less overhead, but a lookup uses comparisons or another search structure instead of an
assumed constant-time hash access.
5.3 Do not index fixed routing bits as if they were still free
If sign-prefix routing fixes some lookup coordinates inside cluster j, those coordinates cannot
vary within it. Let r be the number of lookup coordinates fixed by that cluster, and let
j
h = h−r , U ≤ min(n ,2hj). (28)
j j j j
U is the number of occupied free keys. For first-r-bit routing and a first-h-bit lookup with h ≥ r,
j
h = h−r. The fixed coordinates add a constant penalty for that cluster; they do not create 2r
j
additional keys inside it. Ordinary k-means clusters do not generally fix any sign coordinate, so
this simplification does not follow from their cluster ID.
Example: Two fixed bits and a two-bit local key
Suppose a four-bit code is routed by its first two bits. Inside cluster 10, codes 1010, 1011,
1000, 1001 need only the local keys 10, 11, 00, 01. A lookup for the full prefix must
include the cluster’s constant routing penalty when it is compared with a different cluster’s
stream. The number of local possibilities is four, not sixteen.
5.4 Index storage: name every array
Use the common baseline row order and ID mapping. Let b be the bytes for a local posting
ref
reference, b (h ) the bytes storing a key, and b the remaining per-slot metadata. With a
k j slot
chosen hash load factor 0 < α < 1, a reference sparse-key layout uses
M = X ⌈U /α⌉[b (h )+2b +b ], (29)
keydir j k j o slot
j
where the two offsets represent start and length. Field alignment or different slot layouts can be
substituted explicitly. The additional posting references cost Nb . Therefore
ref
M = M +Nb +M . (30)
C,index base ref keydir
Three ways to search binary embeddings 21
This chosen layout deliberately counts both the common external-ID mapping and the extra
row-reference permutation. If the build reorders the actual codes and IDs by key within each
cluster, postings can become direct contiguous row ranges. Then the extra Nb can be removed.
ref
That is an explicit layout change, not permission to omit all document IDs.
For a dense offset directory instead of a hash table,
M = X(2hj +1)b .
dense−dir o
j
Exponential key space makes dense directories expensive. Sparse directories avoid storing empty
keys, but do not make probing empty keys free.
5.5 How to enumerate all flip combinations in weighted order
Let the free-coordinate weights be sorted in ascending order, a ≤ ··· ≤ a . Flipping a subset
(1) (hj)
S costs P a . Merely flipping the first bit, then the first two, then the first three misses
i∈S (i)
other subsets. We need a stream containing all subsets in order.
The following priority-queue construction has at most two children per nonempty subset. It
starts with the empty subset, then the subset containing coordinate 1.
Listing 9: A complete sorted-subset stream, not one chain of flips.
SortedFlipSets(weights):
sort weights ascending, remembering original coordinate IDs
emit (empty subset, penalty 0)
if there are no free coordinates: stop
queue.push(subset={1}, last=1, cost=weights[1])
while queue is not empty:
(S, i, cost) = queue.pop_smallest_cost()
emit (S, cost)
if i < number_of_weights:
queue.push(S union {i+1}, i+1, cost + weights[i+1])
queue.push((S minus {i}) union {i+1}, i+1,
cost - weights[i] + weights[i+1])
Both child costs are no smaller than the parent cost. Every nonempty subset has one parent: if
the coordinate before its largest coordinate is also present, remove the largest one; otherwise
replace the largest coordinate by its predecessor. This explains why the construction visits every
subset without needing a duplicate-state hash set.
A state must store enough information to construct the key. A full bitmask representation costs
b ⌈h /w⌉ bytes per state, plus its penalty, last coordinate and queue metadata. Copying that
w j
mask into children is work. A persistent representation can change this cost, but it then needs
its own traversal and memory accounting.
Example: The full-key order can be accurate even when a greedy branch is not
For q = (0.6,0.5,0.4,0.3), the ideal code is 1111. The first penalties include 0, 0.3, 0.4,
0.5, 0.6, 0.7, and so on. The code 0111 is found by flipping coordinate 1 at penalty 0.6.
The code 1000 has penalty 1.2 and comes later. Complete weighted enumeration finds the
better document first, even though it disagrees on the query’s largest coordinate. It may
Three ways to search binary embeddings 22
have to check several empty keys before that hit.
5.6 Lookup and stopping within selected clusters
For short keys, a simple implementation allocates candidate targets m to probed clusters. A
j
more flexible implementation merges their next-prefix-key scores and draws candidates from
the best available stream. Whichever policy is used must be a parameter of the experiment; a
per-cluster target and a global target are not interchangeable.
Listing 10: Short-key candidate search with explicit per-cluster targets.
SearchShortKeys(q, selected_clusters, h, targets m[j], R):
candidates = empty collection
for each selected cluster j:
stream = SortedFlipSets(free lookup weights in j)
found = 0
for (flip_set, variable_penalty) in stream:
key = ideal_free_key(q, j) XOR flip_set
rows = directory[j].lookup(key) # may be empty
keep eligible rows from this posting range
found += number of kept rows
append those rows to candidates
if found >= m[j] and final prefix-penalty ties are finished:
break
score every candidate with the full d-bit score
keep the best R with the same score/ID rule as A
return best R
Afull-keyexactversioninsteadmergestheclusterstreamsbytheirtotal full-key penalty,including
fixed-sign penalties. Once at least R documents have been found, continue through every key
that can tie or exceed the Rth document. This produces the exact binary top R within the
selected pool. If unprobed clusters remain, global exactness additionally requires their score
bounds to be ruled out or those clusters to be searched.
A short key can also stop exactly. Let T (b) be the prefix score and A = P |q |. Every
h tail i∈/I i
h
document in an unvisited prefix key satisfies
S(q,b) ≤ T (b)+A . (31)
h tail
If the best unvisited prefix upper bound is strictly below the current worst top-R score, the result
is certified. If not, continue even when a nominal candidate quota has been reached. A larger
tail makes this bound less selective. Fixed routing-coordinate contributions must be included
consistently; no coordinate may be counted twice.
5.7 Do we need to rescore a document whose full key is known?
Notalways. Withafullkeyandthetruequeryweights, itscompletescoreisalreadyA−2π (key).
q
Everydocumentinthatkey’spostingrangehasthatsamebinaryscore. Thesearchcanoffertheir
IDs to the result heap without unpacking and rescoring each code. For a short key, the known
prefix contribution can similarly be reused while evaluating only the remaining coordinates.
Three ways to search binary embeddings 23
To make that implementation choice visible, let G be the number of score-table groups
C,j
actually evaluated per candidate in cluster j. The simple pseudocode above has G = G. A
C,j
full-key implementation reusing its exact key score can have G = 0. A tail-only scorer can
C,j
have approximately ⌈d /g⌉ groups, with alignment and fixed routing coordinates handled
remaining
explicitly. It still pays for postings, key-score arithmetic, selection, and any later float reranking.
This optimization changes the cost; it is not a recall loss.
The reference storage formula retains the common packed rows. A specialized full-key layout
can also avoid a redundant per-document code copy by using its stored full keys, provided its
ID/posting and key ownership are redesigned and counted. Equation (30) is one explicit layout,
not a universal lower bound on every possible key index.
5.8 If “work upwards” means removing a constraint
There is another reasonable interpretation of the idea. Instead of flipping a bit and probing one
more exact key, remove a bit constraint. For example, 101* means either 1010 or 1011. That is
a set of keys. A plain exact-key hash table does not answer this wildcard request in one ordinary
lookup.
A fixed-order prefix trie stores paths by successive key coordinates. A node identifies an
occupied prefix. If document rows are ordered by key within a cluster, each node can store
the start and end of a contiguous posting range. Moving to its parent relaxes the last fixed
coordinate. It does not require copying every descendant’s posting list into every ancestor.
Example: Relaxing the key inside the example cluster
For C = {2,5,7,8} and ideal key 1010:
1
Constraint Matching documents Newly visited documents
1010 none none
101* 2 2
10** 2, 7 7
1*** 2, 5, 7 5
**** 2, 5, 7, 8 8
The parent range contains the previous range. Scan only the newly added sibling ranges
if the implementation can retain their boundaries. Otherwise repeated scans must be
counted again. In this particular query the last coordinate is the cheapest one to relax.
That is not true for every query.
Listing 11: A fixed-prefix relaxation variant of Approach C.
SearchByRelaxingPrefix(q, query_key, trie, table, R, candidate_target):
path = follow query_key as far as the stored trie permits
previous_range = empty
best = empty top-R heap
found = 0
for node on that path, from deepest node toward the root:
new_ranges = node.posting_range minus previous_range
for eligible row in new_ranges:
score its code and offer it to best
Three ways to search binary embeddings 24
found += 1
previous_range = node.posting_range
if found >= candidate_target:
return best # approximate stopping rule
return best
An exact version may stop early only after bounding every unvisited region against the current
full-score heap. Simply finding enough IDs in a relaxed prefix is not such a proof. The remaining
score can still change the ordering.
Let Z be the number of stored trie nodes and b their record size, including child links or
j trie
equivalent navigation and range offsets. A simple uncompressed trie satisfies
hj
Z ≤ 1+ Xmin(n ,2u).
j j
u=1
Its directory term replaces the hash-directory term by P Z b . Path compression can reduce
j j trie
the actual node count. With range references, document postings are stored once; copying a
posting list into every prefix node would instead add repeated references and can cost O(Nh)
reference storage.
For u ancestor/range visits and F total row visits, a reference cost is
j j
T = T +X[h c +u c +F c +F G c ]+T . (32)
C,trie keyprep j path j range j post j C,j lut,gather select/rank
j
A saved navigation path uses O(h ) records per active stream. Add the candidate heap, gather
j
buffers, and common query RAM. Here F must count repeated rows if they are revisited. The
j
same common pipeline and final rerank terms are added for end-to-end latency.
A fixed trie can drop its last prefix coordinate cheaply. Dropping an arbitrary query-selected
low-magnitude coordinate can produce several disjoint ranges, so it does not have the same
constant-cost parent operation. A query-adaptive bit order requires additional traversal or a
different index. This is the main difference between a prebuilt fixed trie and the query-ordered
bitplane traversal.
5.9 Count keys, postings, scores and enumeration states
Let H be the number of keys attempted in cluster j, including empty keys. Let F be the
j j
number of eligible posting rows retrieved and scored. Let E be the number of sorted-subset heap
j
comparisons,Ccopy thenumberofkey-wordcopies,andletQmax bethelargestenumeration-queue
j j
size. Define F = P F .
j j
Forthetwo-childstream, E = O(H log(Qmax+1))comparisonwork, andCcopy = O(H ⌈h /w⌉)
j j j j j j
for full-mask copies. Hashing a key also depends on its length and table layout. An effective
c (h ,α) should price the emitted-key iteration outside heap comparisons and child-mask
lookup j
copies: key construction, fixed state bookkeeping, the directory lookup, and obtaining the current
key score or bound. This includes cache effects and collisions, rather than assume one CPU
operation.
Three ways to search binary embeddings 25
T = T +
Xh
E c +Ccopyc +H c (h ,α)+F c
i
C,candidates keyprep j enum j copy j lookup j j post
j∈P
+X F G c +H (F,R)c +T (R), (33)
j C,j lut,gather s heap rank
j
T = T +T +T (R′). (34)
C common C,candidates finish
T includes sorting lookup weights, initializing streams and constructing query keys. For P
keyprep
different free-coordinate sets, a straightforward upper count is O(P h log(h +1)). A global
j j j
merge adds its own P-stream selection work, typically O((P H )log(P +1)); include it when
j j
that variant is used.
The hash directory can be built before the query, but query-specific weighted order depends on q.
Precomputing a hash table does not precompute this order for every float query.
5.10 Query RAM while enumerating
Let b include a key mask, penalty and queue metadata. For simultaneously active streams,
enum,j
the candidate-search scratch is
 
Q C,search = Q base +max  X γ C Q j (t)b enum,j +Q stream merge (t)+Q posting buffer (t)+Q gather (t) .
t
j
(35)
A sequential per-cluster implementation can reuse enumeration memory, replacing the sum of
live stream sizes by the maximum live cluster stream. A global full-score stream may need all
selected streams active. These are different execution choices.
Postings can be streamed into a top-R heap; storing all F retrieved IDs is not mandatory. If
they are materialized for batch reranking, add Fb or the actual bounded batch size. A sparse
ref
dictionary’s small stored size does not bound the size of a query’s enumeration queue. With the
two-child stream, the queue can grow by at most one per emitted state, but H itself can be
j
enormous.
What Approach C does and does not lose
Full-key enumeration in true penalty order can have 100% binary recall. Its difficulty can
be time or queue memory, especially when most keys are empty. Short-key search is a
different tradeoff: it can collect useful candidates cheaply, but a fixed quota is not a recall
guarantee. It becomes exact if a valid full-score bound proves that no unseen candidate
can improve the result, or if it eventually scores every eligible document.
6 Deriving recall without assuming the answer
The work formulas require counts such as visited nodes, retrieved postings and scored rows. They
do not, by themselves, give recall. Recall depends on which rows survive and on the reference
ranking. This section starts with an exact definition, then adds assumptions one at a time so
their consequences can be checked.
Three ways to search binary embeddings 26
6.1 The exact measured definition
Let E(q) be the eligible document set after the intended filter, across the whole database. Let
G (q) be its exact top K under the chosen reference score, and let R (q) be the returned results.
K K
Then
|G (q)∩R (q)|
Recall@K(q) = K K . (36)
K
Use the same tie rule in both sets. Average this quantity over queries. Repeating one query for
timing does not create new independent quality observations.
If a candidate set D(q) is reranked with the same exact reference score, every true top-K
document in that set survives into the final top K. Therefore
|G (q)∩D(q)|
Recall@K(q) = K . (37)
K
A different reranking score breaks that identity. In particular, exact binary candidates may still
miss the true float-vector top K or the documents relevant to a human question.
6.2 Separate routing loss from candidate-search loss
Let U(q) be the eligible pool in the probed clusters. Define
|G (q)∩U(q)| |G (q)∩D(q)|
r (q) = K , r (q) = K .
route K local |G (q)∩U(q)|
K
When the denominator is positive and D ⊆ U,
Recall@K(q) = r (q)r (q). (38)
route local
If no true top-K result enters the selected pool, total recall is zero. This factorization is exact
when both factors refer to the same true global neighbors. However, multiplying an average
routing recall by an average local recall is generally wrong:
E[r r ] = E[r ]E[r ]+Cov(r ,r ).
route local route local route local
Nor is recall against a cluster’s own local top K automatically the same as recall for the particular
global neighbors routed into it. That distinction matters when transferring the flat-pool branch
measurements into a clustered model.
For A, local binary search is exact. For unlimited B with valid bounds, it is exact as well. For
full-key C with complete weighted ordering, it is exact. Their global recall can still be limited by
routing. Finite node budgets and short-key quotas add a second possible loss.
6.3 A deterministic error bound for a short prefix
Split the full score into retained and omitted coordinates:
S = T +Z , T = X q b , Z = X q b . (39)
h h h i i h i i
i∈I h i∈/I h
Because b ∈ {−1,+1},
i
|Z | ≤ A = X |q |. (40)
h tail i
i∈/I
h
Three ways to search binary embeddings 27
Two documents can reverse their prefix order if the omitted contributions overcome their prefix
score difference. A prefix gap greater than 2A is sufficient to preserve that pair’s order. This
tail
is a sufficient bound, not a typical-error estimate.
A more useful query-time certificate compares the best unseen prefix score plus A with the
tail
worst fully scored retained result, as in Equation (31). It adapts to the actual query. If the bound
is too loose, more keys must be visited. Returning a fixed candidate count without checking that
condition remains approximate.
For float truncation, the analogous score error obeys Cauchy–Schwarz:
|q⊤ x | ≤ ∥q ∥ ∥x ∥ .
tail tail tail 2 tail 2
Truncation and binary quantization are separate approximations. Matryoshka training can
improve the usefulness of prefixes, but it does not set either bound to zero or supply a universal
recall percentage.
6.4 Random documents: what the independence assumption actually gives
The following distribution models first omit routing. When routing is added, retain the same
global true-neighbor event or apply Equation (38); replacing it with a different local top-K event
changes the question. Assume nonzero score variance when computing a correlation.
First condition on a particular query q. Assume document signs are independent and equally
likely to be −1 or +1. Then
d
E[S | q] = 0, Var(S | q) = X q2, (41)
i
i=1
E[T | q] = 0, Var(T | q) = X q2, (42)
h h i
i∈I
h
Cov(T ,S | q) = Var(T | q). (43)
h h
Hence the score correlation is exactly
v
uP q2
ρ q = Corr(T h ,S | q) = u t P i d ∈I h q2 i . (44)
i=1 i
High retained variance is not the same as a small worst-case tail bound. Many small omitted
coordinates can have a modest sum of squares but a large sum of absolute values. A useful
approximate prefix can therefore still lack a cheap exactness certificate.
√
The square root is important. Retaining a fraction v of score variance gives correlation v, not
√
recall v and not recall v.
Example: Two random-data cases can have very different prefix recall
With equal coordinate variances, a 24-coordinate prefix of a 256-coordinate query retains
roughly24/256ofexpectedscorevariance. Ifinsteadthefirst24coordinatesareconstructed
to hold 80% of expected score variance, their score is much more strongly correlated with
the full score. The controlled measurements in Section 7 test both cases. The second is a
deliberately favorable distribution, not the definition of Matryoshka embeddings.
Three ways to search binary embeddings 28
If query coordinates are random normals q ∼ N(0,σ2), we can choose a variance profile σ2. The
i i i
ratio of expected prefix and full variances is P σ2/P σ2. For a specific sampled query, use
i∈I h i i i
its actual Equation (44). The expectation of a ratio need not equal the ratio of expectations.
6.5 Real documents need a covariance model, not just a label
A covariance matrix records how coordinates vary together. Its diagonal entries are individual
variances. An off-diagonal entry describes whether two coordinates tend to move together or in
opposite directions. Independent, balanced signs have unit diagonal entries and zero off-diagonal
entries.
For a general binary document vector with mean µ and covariance matrix Σ, let q be q with
h
omitted coordinates set to zero. Then
q⊤Σq
ρ = h . (45)
q q
(q⊤Σq )(q⊤Σq)
h h
This includes dependencies between coordinates. Conditioning on a cluster or filter can change
both µ and Σ. A covariance measured globally is not automatically the conditional covariance
inside the query’s selected clusters.
A learned prefix may preserve ranking information through these dependencies even when its raw
coordinate-energy share is small. Conversely, a prefix can have considerable energy and still fail
to identify the extreme nearest neighbors. Estimating covariance also does not prove a normal
distribution in the tails.
6.6 Equal-weight mistakes lead to a binomial model
Let X = 1[b ̸= t ]. If the X are independent with the same disagreement probability p, and all
i i i i
relevant weights equal a, then a mismatch count over h coordinates satisfies
h
M = X X ∼ Binomial(h,p), π = aM . (46)
h i h h
i=1
A Hamming radius r visits
V (r) = X r h ! (47)
h
u
u=0
keys, and its expected candidate population is
N Pr(M ≤ r) = N X r h ! pu(1−p)h−u. (48)
∗ h ∗
u
u=0
Here N is the relevant reference pool size; it is N without filters or cluster restriction. Equa-
∗
tion (48) is a candidate-count model, not yet recall.
If p = 1/2, every key has equal probability and the expected count reduces to N V (r)/2h.
∗ h
Different p with equal weights give a Poisson-binomial count. Unequal weights give a weighted
i
Bernoulli sum. Neither is described by one ordinary binomial with an average p.
Three ways to search binary embeddings 29
6.7 Derive recall by asking which true neighbors pass
Write F (x) = Pr(X ≤ x) for a cumulative distribution function (CDF): the probability that X
X
is at or below a threshold.
Let A be the prefix penalty and B the omitted-coordinate penalty. Full penalty is A +B .
h h h h
Under coordinate independence, the two sums are independent. Let u define the true full-score
tail, and let v be the candidate prefix-penalty threshold. Then
Z
F (u−a)dF (a)
Pr(A ≤ v, A +B ≤ u) B h A h
r (u,v) = h h h = a≤v . (49)
population Pr(A +B ≤ u) F (u)
h h A h +B h
Readthenumeratorasaweightedsum: foreachallowedprefixpenalty,askwhethertheremaining
coordinates fit within the full-score threshold, multiply by the probability of that prefix penalty,
and add.
This is the logic missing from a candidate-count-only calculation: a retrieved document counts
toward recall only if it also belongs to the true full-score tail.
For equal weights and an integer full radius r , the formula becomes
d
min(h,r ,r ) !
X h d h pu(1−p)h−uF (r −u)
u Bin(d−h,p) d
u=0 . (50)
F (r )
Bin(d,p) d
This is exact for the stated population events. Choosing those radii to approximate top K and a
candidate budget is another step. Finite-sample ranks and score ties need care.
Example: Candidate fraction is not recall
Use all 64 six-bit codes as documents and an all-positive equal-weight query. The best
seven codes have zero or one mistake. Keep only codes matching the first two query bits:
16 codes pass, so the candidate fraction is 16/64 = 25%. Five of the true seven pass: the
ideal code and the four codes whose one error is in an omitted coordinate. Recall is 5/7,
about 71.4%, not 25%. Allowing one error in the two-bit prefix retrieves 48 codes and
includes all seven. Both numbers follow by counting the same true-neighbor event.
6.8 Unequal query weights: count weighted subsets
For a fixed query and lookup coordinates I , define
h
( )
V (v) = # S ⊆ I : X |q | ≤ v . (51)
q h i
i∈S
This counts every attempted key through threshold v, whether occupied or empty. Under
independent uniform keys, expected candidates are N V (v)/2h. With real key probabilities,
∗ q
E[F(v) | q] = N X Pr(key = k | q,cluster,filter). (52)
∗
k:πq(k)≤v
For a clustered lookup, apply Equation (52) separately with pool size e and the conditional key
j
distribution in cluster j, then sum the results.
Three ways to search binary embeddings 30
An average bit-disagreement rate is insufficient to determine these joint probabilities. The
empty-key count V and occupied candidate count F are separate inputs to the latency formula.
q
A dense document distribution near the query key can make F large while V remains small; a
q
sparse key space can do the reverse.
For small h, split weights in two, enumerate each half’s subset sums, sort one list, and count
pairs whose sum is at most v. This meet-in-the-middle calculation uses roughly O(2h/2) memory
and O(h2h/2) sorting/search work. It is an analysis tool for counting keys, not the measured
latency of an online hash enumerator.
For quantized nonnegative integer weights a , a dynamic program computes probability mass:
i
f (s) = (1−p )f (s)+p f (s−a ). (53)
i i i−1 i i−1 i
Replacing probabilities by counts and adding both predecessor counts computes key volumes.
This is exact for the quantized-weight model. It does not silently become an exact calculation
for unquantized query weights. If score quantization incurs a uniform score error at most ϵ, a
score gap greater than 2ϵ is sufficient to preserve a pair’s order. Otherwise candidates near the
boundary need exact scoring or a safe expanded bound.
6.9 The conditional-normal approximation
For many small independent contributions, a joint-normal approximation for full and prefix
scores can be convenient. Subtract each score’s mean and divide by its standard deviation. This
standardizes them to (Z,Y) with correlation ρ. For a true fraction a = K/N and selected
∗
candidate fraction f, set
z = Φ−1(1−a), y = Φ−1(1−f),
K f
where Φ and ϕ are the standard normal CDF and density. The implied recall is
1 Z ∞ ρz−y !
r = ϕ(z)Φ f dz. (54)
b
a
zK
p1−ρ2
We average over the entire true tail. Substituting only z = z calculates a boundary conditional
K
probability, not the integral. When ρ = 0, recall is f. In the limit of identical rankings, ρ = 1, it
is min(1,f/a), subject to ties.
This formula is not valid simply because an embedding is called Matryoshka. A short weighted
binary prefix has finite, discrete support. Its extreme-score distribution can differ greatly from a
normal tail. At a billion documents, top-K events may be far deeper in the tail than any small
validation sample covers. Strong overall score correlation does not certify 99% recall.
The controlled study below fits score correlation on one query group and checks predicted recall
on different queries. Even there, the real-data normal approximation misses by several percentage
points. Such a model can generate hypotheses; it should not declare a real 99%-recall winner.
6.10 What can be concluded about the three methods
• A: exact local scanning has no local candidate-search loss; global loss comes from routing,
candidate/reranker score changes, and the declared filtering task.
Three ways to search binary embeddings 31
• B: exact bound-based traversal has the same binary result as A on the same selected pool.
Finite budgets require query-level measurements or a distribution model for visited nodes
and surviving true neighbors. A node count alone is not enough.
• C: full keys with complete weighted ordering are exact locally. Short keys can be accurate
when their ranking preserves true neighbors and the candidate budget is sufficient. That
possibility should be measured, not dismissed. Their enumeration and posting costs remain
separate from the recall benefit.
The exact empirical definition is always available. Distribution models explain mechanisms;
validation determines where their numerical estimates are useful.
7 What the existing measurements support
The purpose of these measurements is to check the reasoning, not to fit every equation until one
method appears to win. The experiments have different scopes, so their numbers must not be
merged into one unqualified performance claim.
7.1 The one-million-passage scaling study
The archived study used one flat cluster, a fixed 256-bit score, 100 binary candidates, leaf size
32, deterministic branching, cached query embeddings, and one CPU thread. There were 100
validation queries for selecting configurations and 200 held-out test queries, with three timing
repeats. It covered pools from 1,000 to one million real MS MARCO passages.
One-million-document test Median latency Binary recall Fully scored rows
Packed scan 25.14 ms 100% 1,000,000
Branch, budget 32,768 244.98 ms 99.26% about 163,766
Unlimited branch 1,068.84 ms 100% about 999,961
The branch reduced scoring at the finite budget, but did not win at matched target recall. The
whole study found no median or p95 crossover among the tested 95% and 99% target settings.
This conclusion belongs to that implementation, dataset, hardware and grid. It is not a theorem
that every bitplane representation loses.
The original implementation uses dense active masks for every node. Its measured split-word
counter omits leaf reads, which must be derived from the visited-node counts and cluster widths.
The physical mask size at one million rows is 15,625×8 = 125,000 bytes. A frontier with 20,000
such masks would contain 2.5 GB of masks alone. This example explains how query RAM can
be much larger than the packed-code payload; it is not a claimed observed frontier count.
The source summary is results/scaling-msmarco-1m/analysis/settings.csv. Full run
metadata and the validation protocol live beside it. The report’s verification script checks
the numerical rows quoted here.
Three ways to search binary embeddings 32
7.2 The FiQA study asked a broader pipeline question
The denser FiQA run used 57,638 documents and 648 queries, with 583 settings including random
seeds. Its timings include routing, binary candidate search and float reranking, with embeddings
cached. Its quality measures include float Recall@10 and nDCG@10, rather than the scaling
study’s binary Recall@100.
Method Probes Node budget Median ms Float Recall@10
Sign-route binary scan 16 – 0.7524 0.6784
Sign-route branch 32 2,048 0.6256 0.7006
Sign-route branch 64 2,048 0.6466 0.7062
Float IVF reference 8 – 0.1661 0.9127
These selected examples show that probing more clusters with limited work inside them can be
a useful combined tradeoff. They do not isolate traversal efficiency: the selected pools differ.
Within the same selected buckets, unlimited branching was slower than scanning. The float IVF
row uses a different scorer and was a strong practical reference in that experiment.
Random exploration at probability 0.1 did not show a consistent improvement. Its purpose is
to change visit order; it does not provide a mathematical guarantee of higher recall. The full
FiQA report retains losing configurations, empty returns, and the relevant measurement scope.
Its source is results/fiqa-2026-09-09-dense/README.md and the accompanying data.
7.3 A new controlled check of the 24-bit prefix
The small quality study used the same full weighted-binary score and row-ID tie rule for all
methods. There was no outer routing: C = P = 1. Two synthetic datasets had 20,000 random
binary documents. The real-data case used the first 100,000 rows of the cached Nomic/MS
MARCO sample. All cases used d = 256 and h = 24.
One synthetic query distribution gave all coordinates equal variance. The other multiplied the
first 24 coordinates so that they held 80% of expected full-score variance. It was a controlled
favorable case for a prefix, not a model of what Matryoshka always does.
For each case, 16 queries estimated a score correlation and 16 different queries checked the
normal-model prediction. The native full scan agreed with an independent exact score sort on
all 96 query references. The short-key candidate set included all documents in keys tied at the
final prefix threshold, then used the exact full score to keep the top 100.
Data, candidate target Measured recall Normal prediction Gap Median keys
Random equal variance, 1,000 23.00% 21.84% −1.16 pp 846,156
Strong prefix, 1,000 95.00% 97.01% +2.01 pp 846,156
Cached Nomic, 1,000 25.25% 17.41% −7.84 pp 6,976
Cached Nomic, 5,000 52.13% 42.57% −9.56 pp 35,504
Cached Nomic, 10,000 66.19% 58.46% −7.73 pp 78,370
“Gap” is prediction minus measurement in percentage points. Values are rounded from the
per-query evidence. The identical synthetic key counts are expected: the strong-prefix case scales
Three ways to search binary embeddings 33
all first-24 query weights by the same factor, which changes neither their key order nor the prefix
candidate sets. It changes their importance in the full score.
These results support two different conclusions. First, a short prefix is not inherently inaccurate:
the constructed favorable case reaches 95% recall with 1,000 candidates. Second, a simple
statisticalpredictioncanstillmissrealrecallbyseveralpoints. Anerrorofthatsizeisunacceptable
as a certificate of a 99% recall target.
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
100 1k 10k
Candidate target
001@llaceR
Measured Normal estimate
Random coordinates Strong prefix Cached Nomic
N = 20,000 N = 20,000 N = 100,000
100 1k 10k 100 1k 10k
Candidate target Candidate target
Figure 5: Measured short-key recall versus the checked normal approximation. Each panel has its own
explicitly stated document population.
The key counts were calculated from the actual query weights by meet-in-the-middle counting,
including empty keys. The candidate set was constructed using an exhaustive prefix-score
calculation for quality evaluation. That computation is not an implemented hash-search
latency benchmark. Its wall time must not be plotted as the latency of Approach C.
In the same favorable synthetic case, native B at budget 512 recovered about 99.38% of the
binary top 100 while fully scoring about 4,122 documents on average. In the real-data case, B
reached about 58.06%, 86.56% and 99.56% at budgets 512, 2,048 and 8,192. These are quality
and work observations for a flat pool with a 1,000-candidate heap. They do not establish a
latency ranking between an implemented native B and a hypothetical C.
7.4 What was not validated
The study does not validate:
• real recall at a billion documents;
• a routing-recall model across arbitrary cluster counts;
• a normal tail for every query or a fixed percentage of Matryoshka prefix information;
• a concrete hash enumerator’s timing, peak queue size, or SIMD speed;
• float-vector recall, human relevance, or final answer accuracy from binary recall alone.
Three ways to search binary embeddings 34
The supplied calculator notes mixed float top-100 references at different dimensions with the
binary-score reference. That mismatch cannot validate one common recall curve. The new
report uses the same binary truth where it makes direct index comparisons and labels the other
evidence.
7.5 How to extend the checks fairly
Freeze the representation, query set, filtering task and reference score first. Tune on one query
set; check selected configurations on a different one. For every method, retain failures and empty
returns, and record counts as well as times. For C, implement the actual enumerator before
claiming its measured latency. For B, record split words, leaf words, documents scored and peak
frontier memory separately.
At each target recall, compare measured latency quantiles using configurations that actually
reach that target. Use the same query population and report the uncertainty of quality estimates.
Query-levelresamplingisappropriate;countingrepeatedtimingsasindependentqualitysamplesis
not. Afewmeasuredcasesareusefulevidenceaboutmechanisms, notacompletecharacterization
of every data distribution.
8 Bring the formulas together
The three methods share query embedding, preparation, routing, filtering, and the optional final
reranker. Their difference is the work used to obtain candidates from the selected pool. This is
the right boundary for comparing the index algorithms without hiding common costs.
8.1 Latency, one method at a time
Using the earlier definitions,
T = T +Pc +N Gc +H (N ,R)c +T (R)+T (R′), (55)
A common range elig lut s elig heap rank finish
T = T +T +T +X s W c +X ℓ W c
B common order roots j j split j j leafword
j j
+Vc +FGc +H (F,R)c +T (R)+T (R′), (56)
node lut,leaf s heap rank finish
T = T +T
+X(cid:16)
E c +Ccopyc +H c +F c
(cid:17)
C common keyprep j enum j copy j lookup j post
j
+X F G c +H (F,R)c +T (R)+T (R′). (57)
j C,j lut,gather s heap rank finish
j
G is the candidate scoring work actually needed after reusing the key contribution; it can be
C,j
zero for a full key with its exact score already known.
All cluster sums in query work run over j ∈ P(q). If C uses a merged stream, add its explicitly
counted stream-selection cost. Different execution choices can share preparation or reuse buffers;
record those choices rather than charging duplicated work.
Three ways to search binary embeddings 35
8.2 An index speedup is not the same as an end-to-end speedup
If two configurations have identical embedding and final-stage costs, write their shared time as
T . Replacing index time t by t gives speedup
0 A B
T +t
0 A
,
T +t
0 B
not t /t . Even removing index time entirely cannot exceed 1+t /T when T > 0. If candidate
A B A 0 0
counts or final-vector fetches differ, those costs are no longer shared and must be evaluated
separately. This is why cached-query index timings and complete text-query timings should both
be reported rather than substituted for one another.
8.3 Persistent storage
For the reference layouts selected in this report,
M = M , (58)
A,index base
C
M = M +db X ⌈n /w⌉, (59)
B,index base w j
j=1
C
M = M +Nb +X ⌈U /α⌉ [b (h )+2b +b ]. (60)
C,index base ref j k j o slot
j=1
Storage sums run over all clusters, not only probed clusters. Increasing probes usually changes
query work and scratch, not the already built index size. For literal prefix relaxation, substitute
the trie directory and query-work formula from Equation (32).
A different C layout can remove the additional posting permutation; it cannot remove the
information needed to map results back to documents.
8.4 Peak query RAM and the serving budget
Shared memory Add simultaneously Take the peak
index + model + runtime live query scratch and check RAM
Figure 6: Persistent index data, runtime reserve and simultaneous scratch are separate terms. Sequential
stage buffers need a lifetime analysis.
The search-stage scratch terms are
Q = Q +Q , (61)
A,search base scan workspace
Q = Q +Q +max[γ Q (t)+Q (t)+Q (t)], (62)
B,search base order B B,frontier current children
t
 
Q C,search = Q base +max  X γ C Q j (t)b enum,j +Q stream merge (t)+Q posting buffer (t)+Q gather (t) .
t
j
(63)
Three ways to search binary embeddings 36
Small iterator state is included in workspace terms. Embedding and final reranking can have
larger scratch than search, so use Equation (12) to obtain the full query peak. With resident
index size M for method m, the RAM constraint is
m,resident
M +M +M +max X Q (t) ≤ M . (64)
m,resident model runtime m,u RAM
t
u∈A(t)
M is the shared resident embedding-model memory if encoding runs locally; it is zero in
model
this memory domain when an external service performs encoding. It is not multiplied by the
number of queries.
For a conservative bound, replace the sum by JQ . A loose upper bound that exceeds
m,peak,max
RAM does not prove that a tighter implementation cannot fit. An observed peak below the limit
does not prove that every possible query fits. These are different claims.
8.5 A compact comparison table
A: full scan B: bitplanes C: key enumeration
Additional index none beyond common db P W postings and key directory
w j j
layout
Principal work every eligible code split masks, leaf masks, empty and occupied keys,
full scores, frontier enumeration, postings,
full scores
Variable counts N s ,ℓ ,f ,V H ,F ,E ,Qmax
elig j j j j j j j
Largest scratch selection or batch score many full-width pending many pending flip sets or
concern buffers masks candidate gather buffers
Local exactness scan all eligible rows valid bounds, sufficient full-key weighted order or
traversal, correct ties a valid full-score bound
Approximation routing probes; node budget, visit policy, prefix width, candidate or
control candidate/rerank earlier routing key budget, earlier routing
boundary
What must be kernel cost, routing skipped scores versus empty-key volume versus
measured quality bitmap/queue cost and useful candidates, timing
recall and recall
8.6 The variables most likely to move the tradeoff
Documents per physical cluster, n . A grows roughly linearly with eligible row count. In B,
j
a larger cluster also widens every active bitmap. In C, more documents per key can reduce the
number of empty probes needed, while increasing posting and scoring work.
Binary dimension, d. Longer codes increase score terms and stored bits. B may gain more
from avoiding full scores, but also stores more planes and can traverse more coordinates. For
full-key C, the number of possible keys grows exponentially. For short-key C, h and d are separate
parameters.
Probes, P. More clusters can recover missed neighbors. They also increase eligible rows, root
masks, active key streams and candidate competition. Cluster sizes and the query’s routing
behavior matter, not just the number P.
Three ways to search binary embeddings 37
Leaf size and node budget. A small leaf threshold can trade scoring for more mask work. A
finite node budget caps visits but does not specify how many useful leaves are reached. The best
choice depends on the query and data, not a general monotonic recall formula.
Lookup width and candidate target. A short key has denser postings and a smaller key
space, but leaves more score information out. A longer key can improve candidate discrimination
and simultaneously make empty-key enumeration costly. A strong prefix can improve recall; that
does not remove the enumeration cost.
Kernel and memory system. SIMD, cache residency, batch size, alignment, layout and thread
count change the effective coefficients. Keep them fixed for an algorithm comparison, or report
their changes as a separate experiment.
8.7 Choosing configurations at fixed N and RAM
Let θ contain the chosen method’s tunable parameters and let r be a recall target. Choose
m 0
the latency objective explicitly, for example median or p95 across queries. A valid optimization
statement is
θ∗ ∈ argminQuantile [T (q;θ )] (65)
m p m m
θm
subject to the RAM condition in Equation (64) and
E [Recall@K(q;θ )] ≥ r . (66)
q m 0
The expectation specifies an average-recall target. A requirement that almost every query reach
r is stronger and needs a different probability constraint.
0
Listing 12: A defensible finite-grid experiment.
ChooseConfiguration(corpus, queries, fixed_reference, RAM_limit, targets):
build or cache every configuration’s required index
compute exact reference results once for each query
on tuning queries:
for every configuration in the declared grid:
measure latency, quality, work counts and peak RAM
keep failures and empty returns in the record
choose qualifying configurations for each target
on separate test queries:
evaluate those choices without retuning
report lowest tested latency only where the target and RAM checks pass
distinguish measured results from untested model predictions
A mathematical model can reduce the grid and explain its results. It cannot manufacture the
unknown query/document distribution or the true hardware coefficients. A “best estimated
point” from a model is a proposed experiment, not a verified engineering choice.
If d is also varied, keep the quality reference fixed across choices, for example the same long-vector
top K or the same relevance labels. Recomputing a different binary ground truth for every d
makes a tiny representation look perfectly accurate against its own changed task.
Three ways to search binary embeddings 38
Final interpretation
A pays to score the selected pool. B pays to discover which scores can be avoided, and
dense bitmaps can make that discovery expensive. C pays to discover which keys contain
useful candidates, including empty keys and queue work. Each can be exact under a
suitable stopping rule. Which is fastest at a recall target is determined by the data,
the representation, the visited work, the memory layout and the hardware—not by one
operation count or one assumed normal distribution.
Three ways to search binary embeddings 39
A A finite-sample view of prefix recall
The population-tail approximation is not the only mathematical definition available. This
appendix shows what an exact finite-N calculation would require, under independent, identically
∗
distributed document score pairs and no score ties. It is useful for understanding why knowing
only a correlation is insufficient.
For a particular document with full score s and prefix score t, classify another document into
four events:
p (s,t) = Pr(S > s,T > t), p (s,t) = Pr(S > s,T ≤ t),
11 10
p (s,t) = Pr(S ≤ s,T > t), p (s,t) = Pr(S ≤ s,T ≤ t).
01 00
Among the other N − 1 documents, let (a,b,c,e) count these categories. A multinomial
∗
distribution counts how many independent documents land in each of the four categories, using
those probabilities. The chosen document belongs to the full top K when a+b ≤ K −1, and
belongs to the prefix top R when a+c ≤ R−1. Therefore, with e = N −1−a−b−c,
∗
P (s,t) = X
(N
∗
−1)!
,pa pb pc pe . (67)
K,R a!b!c!e! 11 10 01 00
a,b,c≥0; a+b≤K−1; a+c≤R−1
a+b+c≤N∗−1
If F is the joint distribution of one document’s scores, every document has the same event
S,T
probability under the identical-sampling assumption. Summing over all N documents and
∗
dividing by K gives
N Z
E[Recall@K] = ∗ P (s,t)dF (s,t). (68)
K,R S,T
K
This assumes the candidate stage returns exactly the prefix top R and the final stage uses
the same full score. Retrieving whole tied prefix keys changes that candidate rule; ties can
be handled by augmenting the ordering with document IDs or by explicitly integrating their
selection probabilities.
Equation (68) is much harder to evaluate than the conditional-normal approximation. More
importantly, it still needs F . Matryoshka training, a code length, a cluster count and a RAM
S,T
budget do not uniquely specify that distribution. Exact mathematics can organize unknown
inputs; it cannot infer them from the algorithm’s name.
B Checklist for an honest numerical implementation
1. Fix the score and tie rule. Keep original-float, truncated-float, binary-score and human
relevance references distinct.
2. Check the score identity on small vectors and enumerate the actual top K.
3. Check that the weighted-subset stream emits every subset once, in nondecreasing penalty,
and processes the final boundary tie before claiming exactness.
4. Count split words and leaf words separately. Use each cluster’s physical width, including
padding; do not substitute the number of active documents for the bitmap length.
5. Record the ownership of codes, external IDs, posting references and key storage. Any shared
or reordered array must be stated before removing its bytes from a formula.
Three ways to search binary embeddings 40
6. Count temporary state at its lifetime peak. A queue-capacity bound and an observed
allocation peak are different quantities.
7. Keep key attempts separate from occupied keys and returned postings. Expected first hit is
not the same threshold as finding R candidates.
8. Price centroid float arithmetic separately from binary score lookups. Charge selection,
allocation, copying and gathers where the implementation performs them.
9. Use either a calibrated combined cost or a disaggregated operation model for each block. Do
not count the same memory and selection work in both.
10. Test statistical predictions on queries not used to estimate their parameters. Evaluate recall
after the actual candidate and tie rules, not merely a probability of finding some key.
C Floating-point arithmetic and exactness
The score and bound proofs use real arithmetic. A numerical implementation must ensure its
computed upper bounds remain conservative under rounding. The local C++ reference includes a
rounding allowance for bound pruning and a deterministic row-ID tie order. A report should not
claim exactness merely because an unguarded floating-point comparison resembles the algebra.
This does not require inventing a collection of hypothetical production patches. It requires
checking the numerical path used by the implementation and testing it against a full reference
scan on the same inputs. The small examples and archived candidate checks provide such
evidence for their stated scopes; they do not prove every future implementation correct.
D Optional expansion of the embedding cost
The main formulas keep T and Q as measured model-specific functions. If a more detailed
emb emb
encoder estimate is needed, its architecture must be another set of inputs, not an unexplained
constant.
For an illustrative standard dense Transformer encoder, let n be query tokens, L the number
t e
of layers, m hidden width, f feed-forward width, and H attention heads. For one layer with
a
ordinary two-matrix feed-forward computation, multiply-add contributions are
U = 4n m2+2n2m+2n mf. (69)
layer t t t
The first term comes from the query, key, value and attention-output projections. The second
comes from attention-score and attention-value matrix products. The third comes from the
feed-forward expansion and contraction. Activation, normalization and softmax operations add
separate elementwise terms. A different block, gated feed-forward network or sparse attention
requires different counts.
A corresponding parameterized time model is
T = T +L (cid:0) U c +U c (cid:1)+T .
emb tokenize e layer enc,mac elementwise enc,elt pool/project
These effective coefficients depend on batching, device kernels, precision and memory behavior.
Alternatively use the resource bound in Equation (19), without adding it on top of coefficients
that already include the same work.
Three ways to search binary embeddings 41
A non-fused attention implementation may materialize H n2 attention values. With bytes per
a t
activation b , an explicit scratch model can be written
a
Q = b (cid:0) η n m+η n f +η H n2(cid:1)+Q ,
emb a m t f t a a t kernel
where the η coefficients count simultaneously live buffers, not time. Fused attention can avoid
materializing the square attention matrix, so its chosen buffer counts differ. Layer workspaces can
be reused during inference; multiplying a per-layer peak by L is not a general inference-RAM
e
formula. Resident model weights are shared and counted separately.
A Matryoshka prefix normally reuses an already computed embedding. Halving the search
prefix d does not automatically halve the encoder’s layer count or hidden width. It reduces
the subsequent representation and search work unless the actual encoder implementation also
changes.
E Reproduction and parameter ledger
The editable source is report.tex, with chapter files in sections/. Mermaid sources and
rendered diagrams are in figures/. The build instructions are in the adjacent README.md. The
arithmeticchecksareimplementedinverify_math.py. Theyvalidatetheworkedexamples,exact
subset ordering, binomial conditional-recall example, word widths, selected storage identities,
and quoted measured rows. The statistical evidence is preserved with its source hash.
The following ledger identifies the inputs a future calculator must obtain rather than infer from
one document count.
Input family Parameters or counts How to obtain them
Representation D,d,d ,d , preparation and score fixed experimental definition;
r f
rule embedding/model metadata
Retrieval target K,R, filter, reference score, tie rule fixed task definition
Cluster layout C,n ,P(q),e built index and per-query
j j
routing/filter traces
Storage widths w,b ,b ,b ,b ,b ,b actual types, packing and
w id o c f s
alignment
Baseline scoring g,G,H ,c source code, work counters and
s lut
kernel measurements
Bitplane search L,B ,s ,ℓ ,f ,V configuration plus query traces;
node j j j
not budget alone
Bitplane RAM frontier masks, current/child buffers, allocation/capacity measurements
capacities or an explicit bound
Key index I ,h ,U ,α,b ,b chosen lookup coordinates, index
h j j k ref
build and slot layout
Key search H ,F ,E ,Qmax, stopping rule actual key enumeration, posting
j j j j
and frontier traces
Prefix-trie variant Z ,b ,u , posting ranges actual stored nodes, path and
j trie j
range visits
Hardware compute rates, bandwidth, cache calibrated for the actual workload
regime, SIMD, threads and machine
Optional final stage fetch policy, R′,u ,d , rerank score execution pipeline and
f f
storage-residency decision
Three ways to search binary embeddings 42
Input family Parameters or counts How to obtain them
Statistical model query/data distribution, covariance, declared synthetic assumptions or
score tails measured and checked estimates
Serving RAM M ,M ,M ,J,Q ownership/lifetime analysis and
resident model runtime peak
process measurements
A numerical example can assign values to these parameters. The equations themselves remain
parameterized, so changing the workload changes the inputs instead of requiring a different
explanation of the algorithm.
References
[1] Exa Team. How we built a web-scale vector database. 17 December 2024. https://exa.ai/
blog/building-web-scale-vector-db.
[2] A. Kusupati et al. Matryoshka Representation Learning. 2022, revised 2024. https://arxiv.
org/abs/2205.13147.
[3] M. Norouzi, A. Punjani, D. J. Fleet. Fast Exact Search in Hamming Space with Multi-Index
Hashing. 2013, revised 2014. https://arxiv.org/abs/1307.2982. This concerns Hamming
search; it is not a weighted-search guarantee for the methods here.
[4] Local project evidence. cpp/index.cpp, cpp/index.hpp, results/scaling-msmarco-1m/,
results/fiqa-2026-09-09-dense/, and calculator/recall-validation.json. Repro-
duction and source hashes are described in Section 7.